Why is the Pacific coast population of the western snowy plover protected as threatened species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973? Because human have decided that they are responsible for maintaining the balance of nature. This point of view maintains that humans control their own destiny and that of all life on Earth. In short we are “Anthropocentric”, the human species is considered the center of the universe everything in the universe is conceived in terms of human values. We are uncomfortable with the idea of the randomness and constant change we see in life and the world around us. Conservation managers in particular, have failed to recognize that ” There is no balance in nature there are only relative rates of change.” It is impossible to try to maintain the balance of nature. The terms ‘ecosystem and ecosystem health’ are ill-defined and associated with an outmoded, superorganismic view of the ecosystem.

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, is committed to applying an ecosystem approach to conservation to allow for efficient and effective conservation of the nation’s biological diversity (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1994). The goal of this policy is to incorporate ecosystem considerations in the development and implementation of recovery plans for communities or ecosystems. In particular, these recovery plans shall be developed and implemented in a manner that conserves the biotic diversity of the ecosystems upon which the listed species depend. The idea is that improved habitat conditions for co-occurring species within the coastal beachdune ecosystem will undoubtedly occur through attainment of western snowy plover recovery plan objectives.

The snowy plover is being used as an Umbrella species or Flagship species: A species that needs such large tracts of habitat that supposedly saving it will automatically save many other species. Because it is so difficult to monitor and manage every aspect of biodiversity, several shortcuts have been proposed whereby we monitor and/or protect single umbrella or flagship species, such as the snowy plover.

Unfortunately, monitoring of the single umbrella or flagship species is grossly inaccurate, and moreover impossible to attain. The success of this policy, however, is guaranteed. The political impact is to increase funding for more restoration efforts and monitoring of the flagship species, and thus the governance of those efforts. Increased monitoring and restoration efforts might easily disturb the natural recovery of the flagship species, and reinforce the policy.

A flagship species, such as the snowy plover, is charismatic and is used to successfully anchor a conservation campaign because it arouses sympathy, public interest, and stimulates conservation awareness, action, and funding for its protection. Sympathy for flagship species are often very expensive in terms of lost public coastal access and have negative economic impacts for residents and tourists alike.